
The spider and the flie A parable of the spider and the flie, made by Iohn Heywood.
Heywood, John, 1497?-1580?
Table of contents | Add to bookbag
 The Introduction to the matter, showing howe the flie chaunsed to fall in the spiders copweb. Cap. primun.
[illustration] [depiction of spider and fly story] 

IN season what time euery growing thinge
That ripeth by roote, hath liuely taken hart
Grasse, leafe, and flowre, in field so florishing
That wintered withered stalkis, stand in couart
Though weerie withered hartis, plaie than like part
Couertly coucht in bed, them selues to hyde
Yet hartis of lust, the bed can not abyde.

But vp they must, profe of that lust to make
In whiche like cherefull tyme, it chaunced me
From sleepe one night, so timelie to awake
That how ferre night, or how nie daie might be
It past my reache, of searche, sure sine to se
But streight, the searche of nature wrought the crowe
Of daunyng of the daie, warnyng to showe.

Vpon whiche admonision I arose,
But by the tyme, that I coulde get me out,
The daie apeereth and so brode breaketh lose,
Leadyng mine eye, at large to loke about
The fieldis, so freshe, that be ye out of dout
For sauour, sight, and heringe eche byrdis voyse
No chaunge could chaunce, to choose the better choyst.

Whiche I (reioysynglie) herde and behelde
Tyll suche time as the sonne, was cum in sight,
So that the dew (drawne by his powre) must yelde
From therth to thaire, from whence it fell that night
And hauyng herein had mine appetight
I made returne (temprately to remayne)
Out of whot sonne, to temprate house agayne.

Where as (anone) a booke I tooke in hand
Some thinge to reade, to fode foorth fantasie
And stepping to a window, there to stand,
In at a lattes hole, right sodenlie
Euen at a fling, fast flew there in a flie
That sang as shrill, and freshlie in my minde,
As any byrde coulde do, bredde of that kinde.









Now here, now there, of winge he made no store,
But for a flie oh lorde how he then sang
Two notes aboue his highest note before,
Wherin, encreast his courage more and more,
He flew, he friskt, he tost, he turnde about,
The flie of flies, no flie I trow so stout

But as the firmament most cleere and blew
The golden sonbeames bent to bewtifie
The courtaine drawne of clowdie weeping hew
Withdraweth and chaungeth, that christall asure ski• 
From blew to blacke: so fareth it with the flie.
Amyd whose ioy, at window to haue past,
A copweb maskth his winges and maketh him fast.

Thus chaunce hath (by exchaunge) the flie so trapt,
That sodainly he lost his libertee:
The more he wrange, the faster was he wrapt
And all to thencrease of his ieoberdee,
Which parell, when he did conceiue and see
Suche was his rage in hast from thence to flitte
As made him seeme, welnie out of his witte

He wafted his winges, he wagged his tayle
He shooke his head, he frounde, he stared wyde,
He spurnde, he kickte, but when nought wolde auayle
To ryd him thence, but there he must abyde,
As breath and breast wolde beare, loudely he cryde
And wofullie as any one flie can
In folowynge foorme, this wofull flie began.
[illustration] [ornament] 



John Heywood’s Rhyme Royal. Intro from The Spider and the Flie. Printed by Thomas Powell, London, 1556

