



Wytty and Witless


[MS BL Harley 367 f.110-119. The MS may be fragmentary at the beginning, or indeed this may be the beginning of the play. Throughout this transcription, scribal thorns are rendered ‘th’ and yoghs are rendered ‘gh’; neither letter was standard in 16th-C printed copies of Heywood’s plays which constitute our comparanda for the digital project. Of Heywood’s plays, only this one survives in a contemporary MS. For the purpose of more efficient lexical identifications and derivation of statistics on patterning, I have both transcribed and supplied a minimum of punctuation. I have also extended abbreviated words.] 

John 
A mervelus mater marcyfull lorde					
if reason whyth this conclewtyon acorde:

better to be a foole then a wyse man
better or wurs I seay as I began:
better is for man that man be wyttles
then wytty.

James 
		Ye schow some wytty wyttines.			
Experyens schall wyttnes mt tale trewe
and for temperall welthe let us fyrst vuewe:
and that experyens may schowe the trewer
accepte we reson to be owr vuewer.
In whyche reson by experyens we knowe
that folke most wytty to whom ther dothe growe
by frenddes dedde before nowght left them behynde
nor by lyvyng frendds no lyvynge asynyde
except they wyll storve ther fyndyng myst they fynde
by much payne of body or more payne of myndde.
And as for the wyttles who saythe the sott
the naturall foole calde or thydeote
from all kyndes of labore that dothe payne constrayne
as farre as syffycyency nedythe obtayne
in sewtry of lyvyng the sot dothe remayne.

John 
In sewrty of lyvyng but not withe owt payne			
for admyte all sotts in case as be mayny
that leve withe owt labot yet where is any
but for that one plesewr he hathe more payne
then the wyty wurker in all dothe sustyne?
What wretche so ferythe payne havyng eny wytt
lyke the wyttles wretche? None if ye marke hyt.
Who cumth  by the sott who cumth he by
that vexyth hym somewey usewally?
Some beate hym som bob hym
some joll hym some job hym
some tug hym by the heres
some lugg hym by the eares
some spet at hym some spurne hym
some tosse hym some turne hym
some snape hym some snatche hym
some crampe hym some cratche hym
some cuff some clowt hym
some lashe hym some lowte hym
some whysk hym some whype hym
withe scharpe nayles some nype hym.
Not even mayster Somer the Kyngs gracys foole
but tastythe some tyme some nyps of new schoole.
And by syd thys kynde of frettyng and fewmyng
another kynd of turment in consewmyng
the wytty to the wyttles oft invent.
After inventyon of yerfull entent
the foole by flatery to turment is browght
so farre over hoyd and his brayne so wyde wrowght
that by joy of a jewell skant wurthe a mycht
the sott ofte slepyth no wynke yn a whole nyght.
And for ensampyll withe a Walsynham rynge
Thys dystemperans to the soe ye may bryng
and make hym joye thereyn as hyt were a thyng
of pryce to peyse the rawnsome of a kynge.
In joying wheeof if ony man got way
to get yt frim hym as evry chylde may
then man and chylde sethe the sot in suche case
that nowght but paynfull sorow takythe ony place.
By thys small prosses a small wytt may gess
that wyde were the wyttty to wyshe thm wyttles.

Theffecte of the yowr matter as ye spake yt			James

Standyth muche yn two poynts as I take yt:
of whyche tweyne the tome is that the sot hathe
by jollynge and jobbynge and other lyke skathe
extreme payne withe extremyte of yere;
thother is after frettyng fewryus fyre
that the foole withe eche frewtles tryflyng toy
is so dystempryd withe dystemprat joy
that as muche payne brynght hys plesant pashyon
as dothe the punchynge of his most paynfull fashyon.
Thes two poynts consyderyd the sot as ye saye
hathe some payne sontyme but most tymes I say nay.

The from no payne to some payne the wyttles are browght.	John

Ye but wytty and wyttles wytyly wrowght				James
by some payne to such payne that wytty fele most
then wytte and wyttles eche parte his parte bost.
Take of wytty the degrees and nombyr all
and of that nombyr I thynke the nombyr small
but that eche one of the m is of nede saynde
to labor sore yn bodyor ells yn mynde.
And few to all that fortewne do dothe favor
but yn body and mynde bothe they do labor
and of <...> thes labors the most paynefullest
is the labor of mynde I have harde gest.
And lest bothe paynes or most of twayne be to towgh
for you to matche with and lest payne inowgh
to the fyrst most payne of the wyttles nody
joyne we the wyttyse least payne: payne of body.
Who sethe what payne labor bodyly bryngth
schall easely se therby how the body wryngth.
Husbond mens plowyng or earyng and sowyng
hedgyng and dytchyng withe repyng and mowyng
in cartyng such lyftyng such burdenns bareyng
that payne of the body bryngthe <...> to stareyng.
And much of thys done yn tyme of such hete
that yn the colde cave covryd the carcas must swete.
Some other use crafts in whyche wurcke is so small
that yn simer plesaunttly they lyve all
who in wynter when husbondmen warme withe warke
in that they may not sturr for colde ar evyn starke.
Some yn wynter fryse some yn somer fry
and the wyttles dothe nother for comenly
Other whythe worshypfull or honorabull
He temprately standth in howse at the tabyll
and of all his labors reckyn the hole rabyll
bygger burden barthe he none then his babyll.
So that from thes paynes ir the lyke recytyd
the wyttles hathe warrant to be aquyghtyd
and sewr the sotte pleasewurein this last aquyghtal
cownterwalth his payne in yowr recyghtall.
Feor unto the sotts nyppyng and beatyng
joyne the wytty ;aborers nypps and freatyng
and whether ye cownt by yere monthe or weke
ye schall fyned thease of the wytty to seeke
as far as thof the wyttles and of bothe sorts 
this is the dyfferens that to me ynports:
sotts are coyled of other the wytty coylthe hym self.
What choyse thus aleagyd?

				Small, aah horson elfe!		John
Some what he towchythe me now yn very deed
how beyt to thys I an not yet fyll agreed.
The wytty who beate them selves by bysynes
May ofte yn beatyngs favowr them selves I ges.
Such oportewnyte by wytte is ofte espyde
that abor by wytt is ofte qualyfyd
in taking tyme or place as beast may stand
most easelye to dyspatche things cumyng in hand.
Wytt hathe provytyon alwey for releefe
to provyde some remedy agaynst myscheef.
Wytt take bysynes as wytty wykk make yt
And as wytte beate wyttles wyttles must take yt.

Tak yt howe ye lyst ye can make yt no les
by wytte have suche payne as my wordes wyttnes.
For thowgh wytt for tyme some tyme may payne prevent
yet yn most tymes theyre foreseyde payne is present;
Whych payne in the wytty wyttyly wede
may match payne of the wyttles fy ye fyrst leyde.
And to the second poynte for dystemporate joyes
by havyng or hopyng of fancyes or toyes
in wyttl[e]s or wytty bothe take I as one
for though the thyngs that wytty have or hope on 
are yn some kynde of acownt thyngs muche gretter
then thyngs of the sotts joyings yet nowhyt better
nor les payne bryngth that passhyon but endyferent
to both except wytty have the woors turment.
Thyn[k] yow a right good wytty havynge clerely
a thowsand pownd sodaynly gyvyn hym yerely
who before that owre myght dyspend no peny
nor tyll that owre never lokyd for eny,
myght not joy as muche that soden recevyng
as joythe the sott reseyte of hys Walsyngam rynge
and thereby be kepte from quyet slepe a weke?
As well as the rynge makethe the sotte sleepe to seeke
and in a soden leesyng that gyfte agayne
myght not the wytty be preysed withe payne
as depe as the wyttles his ringe stolne or lost?
And though thys ensampyll chanse seelde when at most
yet sometyme yt happyth and dayly we see
that folke farr from wyttles passhynyd be
by joyfull hope of thyngs to then lyk to hape
as muche to theyre unrest for dystemreancy
as ye showde the wyttles restles formerly
and oft tyme for cawse consydryd and weyde
as lyght as yowr Walsyngam runge afore leyde.
Wyttin wytty hathe seelyd suche perfecshyon
to bryng dysposyshyon is such
some wytts hope to lyttyll so wytte hope to muche.
By whyche over muche I sey and sey must ye
that wytte and wyttles one in thys case be.
And thus in bothe casys reasonyng cawse showthe 
cawse to conclewed that to the wytte growth
as muche payne as to the wyttles wherby
as good be wyttles as wytty say I.

That conclewcyon is conclewdyd wysely.				John
Yowr prime proposycyon dyd put presysely:
better to be wyttles then wytty and now
as good to be wyttles as wytty sey yow.
But that wytt whych putth case yn degre comparayve
and conclewdythe case in degre posytyve
sall not in that case clayme degre sewperlatyve.

Ye pas in this tawnt yowr prerogatyve.				James
But that wytt whyche bostythe the full of his wynnyng
as thowgh he knewe thende of thing at begynnyng
that wytt schall schow wyttles ympedyment
to be taken wytty withe wytts excelent.
I conclewedehere not for thende but for the myds
whyche if ye wyll here to end as reason byds
ye schall perceyve and also condysend
to grawnt me thanks then yn that I entende
yowr fall by feare handelynge to be the more fayre
to set ye down featly stayer after stayer
and so by a fayer fygewre of ynduckshyn
to bryng yowr parte softe and fayer to dystruchsshyn.
For where we grawnt fully for owght yowr wordes make
that as muche payne wytty as wyttles do take,
so from thys myds to the ende I schall pro[v]e
that most payne of twayne to the wyttles dothe move.
For as I lode egally paynes of body
to wytty and wyttles lykewyse wyll I
over lode the wytty with payne of mynde
in mater as playne as can be asynde
whych payne of mynde in mete mesewre to wey
is more paynfull then payne of body I seay.

Ye sey so and seyd so but so seyde not I			John
nor sey yt not yet but that seynge deny
and tyll saynge prove yowr saynge more playnely
I wyl saey to sey contrary.
I thynke paynes of body cowntyd in eche kynde
may cpmpare withe all kyndes of paynes of mynde.

if ye assewrydly thynke as ye sey now				James
I thynke ye thynke as few men thynke but you.
Howbeyt that beyng but an ynsydent
to pryncypall purpose presently ment.
Yet that excepshyn too yor wyttyly
for had ye grawnted that as ye schall schortly
then forthwithe scholde owr pryncypall proses
have concludyd in the parte I profes:
for a meane wherunto as mesewre may
meet un mesewrabull thynges as who say
joyne in lyke prporshyn as may be ment
the mease laborer to the meane studyent;
and ye schall anon fynde the stewdyents payne 
more paynfull that the laborers labor playne.

The stewdyents payne is ofte pleasauntly myxt			John
In felynge what frewte by his study is fyxt.

The laborers labor quyghthe that at a whyppe			James
in felynge the frewte hys wurkmanshyp:
as much delyght carters oft in carts neat trymd
as do studyents yn bokes withe golde neat lymd
and as muche envy who may dreve hys carte best
as amonge stewdyents who may seme lernd hyest
wherby inwarde delyght to tolle forthe eche parte
semthe me yndyfrent to arte or to cart.
And furder meane labor yn most common wye
is most parte hansome and holsome excersyse
that purgethe hewmors to mans lyfe and quycknes
whyche study bredythe to mans dethe or sycknes.
Also most kyndes of labor most comenly
strene most grose the owtewarde partes of the body
where study sparyng scholders fyngers and tose
to the hedde and hart dyrectly study gose.
Prevert is yowr jugement if ye judge not playne
that les is the parell and les is the payne
the kknockynge of knockylls whyche fyngers dothe strayne
then dyggyng yn the hart or drying of the brayne.

For comun meane kyndes in bothe parts now leyde		John
I se not but reason saythe as ye have seyde.

The labor of body and mynde thus compare			James
in what degrese ye can devyse to declare
betwene bothe beynge not knyt yn suche degre
but that thone from thother seperate may be;
and that bothe labors yn joynynge yet arecte
as lyke yn degre as wytt may conjecte
and bothe ons serchyd serche schall make warantyse
yn labor of mynde the wurst payne dothe aryse.

Methynkthe I cowlde make yt otherwyse apere
save I lack tyme to dylate matter here;
for tyme of reasonyng wolde be longe therin
and tyme or reasonyng must be short here in:
whyche weyde withe that this standthe but insydently
to owr present porpose pryncypally.
I graunt to agree as ye have defynde
of labor of body and labor of mynde
that labor or payne of mynde is the greter
and thys nowe graunted what be ye the better?

So muche the bettyr and yow so muche the wurs			James
that ye may now put yowr toong in yowr purs
for ony woorde in defens yowr toonge schall tell
after thes my next woordes gyve eare and marke well.
This labor of myndd whyche we now agre
above labor of body we must decre
to joyne sole to the wytty for possybly
cannot the wyttles take parte of that payne.

							Why?			John

How can he have payne by imagynacyon
that lackythe all kynds of consyderatyon
and yn al sensyc is so ynsofycyent
that nowght can he thynke in owght that may be ment
by ony meane to devyse ony selfe thinge
nor devyse in thyng past persent or cumynge?
No more hathe he in mynde other payne or care
the hathe other Cocke my hors or Gyll my mare.
Thys cawse withe wyttles payne iof mynde dyspensys
but the wytty havynge all vytall sensys
hathe therby an inwarde clock whyche marke who wyll
May oftymes go false but yt never standythe styll:
the plummets of that clocke come never to the grownd.
Imagynacyon is watche and gothe so rownde
to whyche consyeracyon gyvythe so quycke eare
that in the wytty mynde the restles rest is there.
A small wytte may ges no one wytte can deme
how many or how muche are theyre paynes extreme
nor how many contrary kyndes in some one brest.
if ye perceyve thys tale ye se yt wytnest
thre thyngs of whyche the fyrst is that the wyttles
off labor or payne of mynde have reles,
the second is that the wytty have in ure
all paynes of mynde and that the wytty doth that proocure; 
thyrdly I glanset a[t] payne of mynde alewdyng
that payne to be most payne as in for conclewdyng
Perceyvve ye this?

			Ye and grawnt yt trew to.			John

The must ye grawnt wytty to have most payne.			James

John 
So I do 		

James
if wytty have the most payne of tweyne, ye must say
better to be wyttles then wytty

John
Nay				

James 
I say yes 

John
I say ney and wyll so envey
that I wyll holde ye to wagge another wey
As I grawnt wytty to have most plesewre,
whych plesewre schall bothe drowne the wyttys payne
and the plesewer yn whych the wyttles remayne

James
Thys promyse wyll hardly bryng good payment
for yt is a strange kynde of argewment
to prove hym in most plesewre who hathe most payne
or hy yn least payne who least plesewre dothe sustayne

John
Let us reason all plesewrs on bothe sydes
and then let that syde have best that best provydes

James
All plesewrs on bothe sydes That ere a thynge
to make us make ende to morrow mornyng

John
A now the best parte of my parte cumth on
Ye make marvelus hast ye wolde fayne be gone

James
Right now your self cowld wey in right wytty sort
that resonyng here now of reason must be schort

John
Yt shalbe schort unowgh if ye take awey
all that parte that for my part effeckte dothe ley


James
I wyll nother take awey all nor take all		
but for a meane betwene bothe my self steyght schall
alege not plesewrs all I sey but such one
as over weythe other plesewrs evry chone
whyche plesewre where yt in fyne dothe not remayne
all plesewrs in all partts ar plesewrs but vayne 
of whyche one plesewr the wyttles ar sewre evyr
and of that plesewr wytty are sewre nevyr

John
What plesewre is that

James
Plesewre of salvashyon
I thynke yowr selfe wyll affyrme affyrmashyon
that from owrr forfathers syn orygynall
babtym sealythe us a aquyttans generall
and faythe of ynfants whyle they infants abyde
in faythe of parents for the churche is supplyde
Wherby tyll wytt take root of dysernynge
and betwene good and yll geve perfyght warnynge
where ever innosents innisensy dyspewte
for thoughts woordes or deeds God dothe none yll impewte
Wher God gyveth no dys[s/c]ernyng God taketh none acownte
in whyche case of acownt the sot dothe amownt
for no more dysernythe the sott at yeres thre score
then thynosent borne withe in yeres thre before
This schort sayng if ye yn mynde revolve
then schall thys longe debate forthwithe dysolve









MGW transcription of MS		1

