In ych commen welthe, most hygh prehemynence,
Is due vnto lawes for soch commodyte,
As is had by them, For as Cicero geueth sentence
Where as is no lawe, can no good order be,
In nature, in people, in howse nor yet in citie.
The bodyes aboue, are vnderneth a lawe,
Who coulde rule the worlde, were it not vndre awe?
Lyke as Chrysippus, full clarkely doth dyffyne,
Lawe is a teacher, of matters necessary,
A knowledge of thynges, both naturall and deuyne
Perswadynge all truth. dysswadynge all iniury.
A gyfte of the lorde, deuoyde of all obprobry,
An wholesom doctryne, of men dyscrete and wyse,
A grace from aboue and a very heauenly practyse.
Our heauenly maker, mannys lyuynge to dyrect,
The lawes of Nature, of Bondage, and of Grace,
Sent into thys worlde, with vycyousnesse infect,
In all ryghteousnesse, to walke before hys face.
But Infydelyte, so worketh in euery place,
That vnder the heauens, no thynge is pure and cleane,
So moch the people, to hys peruerse wayes leane.
The lawe of Nature, hys fylthy dysposycyon.
Corrupteth with ydolles, and stynkynge Sodometry.
The lawe of Moses, with Auaryce and Ambycyon.
He also poluteth. And euer contynually,
Christes lawe he defyleth. with cursed hypocresy,
And with false doctryne, as wyll apere in presence,
To the edyfyenge, of thys Christen audyence.
Of Infydelyte, God wyll hymself reuenge.
With plages of water, of wylde fyre and of sworde.
And of hys people, due homage he wyll chalenge.
Euer to be knowne. for their God and good lorde,
After that he hath, those lawes agayne restorde,
To their first bewtye commyttynge them to fayth.
He is now in place, marke therfor what he sayth.
I Am Deus pater, a substaunce inuysyble,
All one with the sonne, and holy ghost in essence.
To Angell and Man. I am incomprehensyble,
A strength infynyte, a ryghteousnesse, a prudence,
A mercy, a goodnesse, a truth, a lyfe, a sapyence.
In heauen and in earth, we made all to our glory,
Man euer hauynge, in a specyall memory.
Man I saye agayne, whych is our owne elect,
Our chosen creature, and seruaunt ouer all,
Aboue the others, peculyarly select,
To do vs homage and onour name to call,
Acknowledgynge vs for hys author princypall.
Indued hym we haue, with gyftes of specyall grace
And lawes wyll we sende, to gouerne hym in place.
Steppe fourth ye iii. lawes, for gydaunce of Mankynde
Whom most inteyrly, in hart we loue and fauer.
And teach hym to walke, accordynge to our mynde,
In clennes of lyfe, and in a gentyll behauer.
Depely instruct hym, our mysteryes to sauer,
By the workes of fayth, all vyces to seclude,
And preserue in hym, our godly symylytude.
We consydre that, for as concernynge Man,
Foure seuerall tymes, are moch to be respected.
Of Innocency first, of hys transgressyon than,
Than the longe season, wherin he was afflycted,
Fynally the tyme, wherin he was redemed.
Of pleasure is the first, the seconde of exyle.
The third doth ponnysh, the fort doth reconcyle,
Whan Angell in heauen, and Man in paradyse,
Those lawes had broken. The lawe of wycked Sathan
Impugned your lawes, by craft and subtyle practyse.
Where yow sayd. Eate not. He sayd vnto the woman,
Eate, Ye can not dye, As Godes ye shall be than.
By thys first of all, your lawdes Man proued true.
And Sathans lawe false, whych he now dayly rue.
Lete hym than beware, how he our lawes neglect
Only to Angell, and Man we gaue lyberte,
And they onlye fell, becommynge a frowarde sect.
Not by our mocyon. but their owne vanyte.
For that we gaue them, to their felycyte,
Abused they haue, to their perpetuall euyll.
Man is now mortall and Angell become a deuyll.
Lose Man we wyll not, though he from vs doth fal
Our loue towardes hym, wyll be moch better than so
Thu lawe of Nature, teache thu hym first of all,
Hys lorde God to knowe, and that is ryght to do.
Charge and enforce hym, in the wayes of vs to go,
Thu lawe of Moses, And Christes lawe fynally
Rayse hym and saue hym, to our perpetuall glory.
With the faythfull foet, must thu contynue euer.
Thu shalt my people, returne from farre exyle,
And for euermore, to my grace reconcyle.
Take thys precyouse boke, for a token euydent.
A seale of my couenaunt, and a lyuynge testament.
Hic pro signo datei nouum testamentum
They that beleue it shall lyue foreuermore,
And they that do not, wyll rue their folye sore,
Blessed shall he be, that yow my lawes wyll kepe.
In cytie and felde, whether he do worke or slepe,
Hys wyfe shall encreace, hys land shall frutyfye.
And of hys enemyes, he shall haue vyctorye.
The skye wyll geue rayne, whan seasonable tyme shall be,
The workes of hys handes, shall haue prosperyte.
Cursed shall they be, that wyll not our lawes fulfyll,
Without and within, at market and at myll.
Of corne and cattell, they shall haue non increase,
Within their owne howse, shall sorowes neuer cease
Neuer shall they be, without byle, botche, or blayne,
The pestylence and poxe, wyll worke then deadly payne,
Shewe thys vnto Man, and byd hym take good hede,
Of our ryghteousnesse, to stande alwayes in drede.
We vysyte the synne. and the great abhomynacyon
Of the wycked sort, to thirde and fort generacyon.
Thu lawe of Nature, instruct hym first of all,
Thu lawe of Moses, correct hym for hys fall,
And thu lawe of Christ, geue hym a godly mynde.
Rayse hym vnto grace, and saue hym from the fynde.
Our heauenly blessynge, be with yow euery chone,
The lawe in effect. is a teacher generall,
What is to be done. and what to be layed asyde
But as touchynge me the first lawe naturall
A knowledge I am whom God in Man doth hyde,
In hys whole workynge, to be to hym a gyde,
To honour hys God and seke hys neybers helth,
A great occasyon, of peace and publyque welth,
A sore charge I haue, Mankynde to ouer se.
And to instruct hym, hys lorde God to obaye.
That lorde of heauen graunt, I may so do my dewtie
That he be pleased, and Man brought to a staye.
Hys bryttle nature, hys slyppernesse to waye,
Moch doth prouoke me. But if God set to hande,
He shall do full wel. For non maye hym withstande
